ABSTRACT
Urban green spaces provide environmental ameliorates by reducing air pollution, mitigating urban heat island effects,
and cooling urban areas. The present study aimed to assess the urban green spaces along with the Normalized Difference
Vegetation Index and land surface temperature of 41 wards of Chittagong City Corporation in Bangladesh between 2000
and 2020. The study revealed a dramatic increase in the urban green coverage in the Chittagong City Corporation areas
during 20 years of time-lapse. The total urban green space increased by 58.09%, from 4488.85 ha in 2000 to 7096.42 ha in
2020. Thus, per-capita green coverage increased from 0.003 ha to 0.004 ha. The time series analysis shows that the annual
mean value of Normalized Difference Vegetation Index increased to 0.46 in 2020 from 0.44 in 2000, which indicates a rise in
green areas in the Chittagong City Corporation. The time series analysis also shows a gradual increase in the annual mean
temperature from 2000 through 2020. During this time frame, the annual mean temperature in 2000 was 29.46°C, while it
was 30.41°C in 2020. The study findings will help urban planners build this city sustainably, considering the concept of a
healthy and eco-friendly city.
Keywords: Chittagong City Corporation (CCC), high- and low-density vegetation, land surface temperature (LST),
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI), urban green space (UGS), urban heat island (UHI)
Introduction
Urban green space (UGS) is a significant worldwide consideration for a healthy urban lifestyle (Jim, 2004). Several
developed countries have already adopted the UGS concept for environmentally sound urban life (Senanayake
et al., 2013b; Tajima, 2003). Environmental regulatory services are the critical utility of the UGS. It includes the
absorption of air pollutants, mitigating sound pollution, generating oxygen, and conserving soil, supporting
groundwater enrichment (Jennings et al., 2016).
Urban heat island (UHI), associated with urban microclimates, generally develops due to intensive building
construction, concrete covers, and different human activities on land (Grover & Singh, 2015). The increasing
population in the city demands extended areas (Amri & Giyarsih, 2022). Rapid urban growth replaces the natural
green spaces with concrete impervious surfaces (Simwanda et al., 2019). These changes usually bring negative
environmental consequences, such as reduced evapotranspiration, increased surface runoff, and temperature,
and reduced air and water quality, ultimately affecting the landscape and human health (Coutts et al., 2013;
Huang et al., 2022). Moreover, the unplanned urban development significantly impacts the reduction of vegetation
coverage deduced from the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) parameter, and as a result,
the number of UHIs phenomena is increasing (Arshad et al., 2022; Rahman et al., 2022). Increased population
pressure, conversion of natural land cover types, and urban forests into concrete cover increase the temperature
more in the center of the city than in the suburban and periphery, which develops the UHI (Sarif et al., 2020).
Urban heat island is considered within a metropolitan area that is significantly warmer than the suburban and
periphery areas. The thermal difference is much higher than in the nearest rural areas. Urban heat islands are
generally caused by unplanned urbanization and over-population, which are responsible for replacing the natural
environment with a non-permeable heat-generative built environment (Anibaba et al., 2017; Mohan et al.,
2022; Rajagopalan, 2021; Uddin et al., 2022). Moreover, the UHI also impacts the micro-climatic environment in
an urban context by changing the precipitation rate, temperature, wind pattern, and developing fog and cloud (Aflaki et al., 2017). The UHI can be identified by monitoring land surface
temperature (LST) changes over time (Karakuş, 2019). Different land
cover indices are also considered to investigate the correlation between
land use and land cover and LST changes. Among the indices, NDVI is
the most commonly used index to monitor vegetation density changes
worldwide (Jimenez et al., 2022; Nath, 2014; Nath & Acharjee, 2013). The
healthiness and stress condition of vegetation cover is represented by
the NDVI values between −1.0 and +1.0. The negative values represent
the cloud and water, and the values near zero represent rock and bare
soil. Very low values of NDVI represent the barren area, whereas moderate
values represent the parks, shrubs, and grassland (Moisa et al., 2022;
Nejadrekabi et al., 2022).
The Chittagong City Corporation (CCC) belongs to a city that has a
high population and vehicle density in Bangladesh. Rapid industrialization
and an ever-increasing number of vehicles make the CCC a city
of harmful air pollutants (Mia et al., 2015; Shamsher & Abdullah, 2013).
Having a 25,92,439 population in 41 local government units (officially
called wards), CCC is considered Bangladesh’s most important and largest
port city. In the city, almost 16,513 people live per square kilometer
(BBS, 2012). Excessive human pressure, intensive living status, and different
human activities potentially impact UGS and the urban thermal
environment. The present study intends to find out the UHIs and critical
areas of CCC and also tries to discover if there are any impacts on
LST due to changes in NDVI and vice versa. The research also finds the
ward-based relationship between the spatiotemporal changes in NDVI
and LST. These visible (NDVI) and invisible (LST) changes are difficult
to retrieve using in situ instruments. Instead, remotely sensed data can
provide quantitatively and qualitatively higher spatial and temporal
figures (Bai et al., 2020). Thus, this study used the Moderate Resolution
Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) data to analyze and compare the
time-series NDVI and LST in the CCC.
Dispersion of LST and vegetation cover dynamics through NDVI techniques
determine the environmentally critical areas (Senanayake
et al., 2013a). In urban areas, especially in Bangladesh, quality green
spaces are rarely found and are diminishing daily. Along with this, the
global trend of the greenhouse effect is producing critical environmental
areas in many cities in Bangladesh (Shahid et al., 2016). The
concept of UGS is a crucial part of some of the research conducted
in developed countries (Senanayake et al., 2013b; Tajima, 2003). A
few pieces of research reveal the issues of green spaces in Dhaka
city in Bangladesh (Senanayake et al., 2013b; Tajima, 2003). On the
other hand, very little research explains the city development and its
environmental challenges and traffic congestion for CCC (Islam et al.,
2015; Mia et al., 2015; Shamsher & Abdullah, 2013). Some studies were
conducted on the green space-based recreation change analysis
(Jashimuddin & Alamgir, 2005) and developing open space (Jafrin &
Beza, 2018) for the CCC in Bangladesh. However, the investigation of
CCC regarding the UGS considering its population density, NDVI, and
LST are absent so far. Therefore, this study has focused on this aspect with specific aims and objectives. The present study aimed at specific
research questions to achieve its goal, such as, what are the per capita
UGS, and what are the spatial and temporal modifications of the UGS,
NDVI, and LST in the CCC? Thus, the specific objectives of this study
are focused on the following aspects: (i) to assess the UGS per person,
(ii) to identify UHIs and critical areas, and (iii) to determine the NDVI
and LST in the CCC of Bangladesh. The findings of this study will help
urban planners and local governments to build this city sustainably
by achieving specific sustainable development goals (SDGs) targeting
Goal No. 11 as “Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe,
resilient and sustainable.”
Method
Study Area
The present research selected CCC as the study area because of the
high population density and heavy traffic congestion. The total population
of the CCC is 25,92,439, with 16,513 people per square kilometer,
where the mean size of the household is 4.6, which is growing by 2.62
persons per year (BBS, 2012). In general, Chittagong is the largest commercial
city that contributes to the national economy more than the
other urban areas in Bangladesh. The CCC is considered the second
most prominent urban center in Bangladesh. The neighboring Upazilas
of the Chittagong city are Anowara and Patiya Upazila to the south,
Patiya and Boalkhali Upazila to the east, and Hathazari and Sitakunda
Upazila to the north. The Bay of Bengal lies on the city's western side.
The CCC lies in the southeast part of Bangladesh, ranging from 22°14'
to 22°30' north latitude and 91°45' to 91°53' east longitude covering a
145 km2 area (BBS, 2012).
Chittagong port (one of the largest in Bangladesh) makes the CCC
a diversified, economically intense, industrialized city. In 1989, the
Chittagong Municipal city was upgraded to a Municipal corporation
named Chittagong City Corporation. The CCC possesses 41 local government
units called Ward. The CCC divides into 41 Wards and 211
Mahallas1 under the jurisdiction of the CCC (Figure 1). These 41 wards
in CCC are recorded in the official list chronologically from W-1 to
W-41 and named as South Pahartali (W-1), Jalalabad (W-2), Panchlaish
(W-3), Chandgaon (W-4), Mohra (W-5), East Sholashahar (W-6), West
Sholashahar (W-7), Sulakbahar (W-8), North Pahartali (W-9), North
Kattali (W-10), South Kattali (W-11), Saraipara (W-12), Pahartali (W-13),
Lal Khan Bazar (W-14), Bagmoniram (W-15), Chawk Bazar (W-16), West
Bakalia (W-17), East Bakalia (W-18), South Bakalia (W-19), Dewan Bazar
(W-20), Jamal Khan (W-21), Enayet Bazar (W-22), North Pathantooli
(W-23), North Agrabad (W-24), Rampur (W-25), North Halishahar (W-26),
South Agrabad (W-27), Pathantooli (W-28), West Madarbari (W-29), East
Madarbari (W-30), Alkaran (W-31), Anderkilla (W-32), Firingee Bazar
(W-33), Patharghata (W-34), Boxir Hat (W-35), Gosaildanga (W-36),
North Middle Halishahar (W-37), South Middle Halishahar (W-38), South
Halishahar (W-39), North Potenga (W-40), and South Potenga (W-41).
In the CCC, the mean annual rainfall, mean annual temperature, and
annual relative humidity are 3058 mm, 29.53°C, and 78%, respectively
(BBS, 2012).
Data Used
This study assessed a series of land-use transitions with associated data
to identify the UGS. The project work started in August 2020 and ended
in June 2021. Both remotely sensed satellite imagery and field data
were used in the current study. The satellite imageries such as Landsat
7 Enhanced Thematic mapper (ETM +) and Landsat 8 Operational Land
Imager (OLI), and the Thermal Infrared Sensor (TIRS) were acquired from
the United States Geological Survey (USGS) Landsat archives. In addition,
some ancillary data were collected from different sources like the Forest
Department, Local Government and Engineering Department, Protected
Planet, Chittagong Development Authority (CDA), Bangladesh Bureau of
Statistics (BBS), and the CCC. Direct observation in the field and groundtruthing
provided the field data to identify the features.
The study collected satellite imageries from the cloud-free Landsat
images of 2000 and 2020. Landsat 7 (ETM+) single image data were collected on February 05, 2000, and Landsat 8 OLI-TIRS single image
data were collected on February 25, 2020, from the web portal of the
USGS earth explorer (available at https ://ea rthex plore r.usg s.gov /). The
corresponding CCC boundary shapefile was collected from the CDA.
The two satellite imageries were preprocessed by following radiometric
and atmospheric corrections to convert the images into a standard projection.
The MODIS data were used to find the year-round time series
NDVI and LST for 2000 and 2020 and from 2000 to 2020. For NDVI and
LST, the collections “MODI S/006 /MOD1 3A1”— Terra Vegetation Indices
16-Day Global 500 m resolution, and “MODI S/061 /MOD1 1A2”— Terra
Land Surface Temperature and Emissivity 8-Day Global 1 km resolution,
respectively, were used for both the years. The JavaScript coding
accomplished it in the Google Earth Engine (LPDAAC, 2022a, 2022b).
Image Classification Accuracy Assessment and Data Analysis
Method
Kappa and the confusion matrix were prepared to measure the classification
accuracy, ensuring the image analysis quality. The overall
accuracy and the kappa coefficient were calculated to remove the confusion
about the classification by using the following formula given by
Congalton (1991) and Lu and Weng (2007), as shown in Equations 1
and 2. It detected the NDVI and LST changes over time and space through
comparison. Associated with the UGS, NDVI was calculated as a means
of phenology. The calculation of LST detected the UHI in the CCC areas.
The study used ArcGIS Desktop 10.5 for detailed calculation, accuracy
assessment, and generating detailed maps. For rectification and classification
of the images, the study used the ERDAS IMAGINE 2015. The
study provided the time series and land-use change maps of the CCC
for 2000 and 2020; while creating the map, the scale ratio was maintained
as 1:125,000. The study collected the base map of the CCC
from the CDA. It helped the study navigate the urban forest areas and other tree canopies while verifying the changes in the green spaces. It
also used the Global Positioning System set for ground-truthing. The
Geographic Information system (GIS) and image processing software,
that is, ArcGIS 10.5 and ERDAS IMAGINE 2015, processed the data with
the help of MS Excel. The statistical packages R (version 3.2.2) and MS
Excel were used to analyze the data statistically. Finally, the combination
of land use, NDVI, and LST identified the environmentally critical areas
of the CCC area. The entire process is presented in a methodological
flowchart in Figure 2. Further, the details of analysis methods are breakdown
into subheadings such as green space analysis, NDVI, LST, and
correlation and regression.
Green Space Analysis
The study identified the UGS in each of the CCC wards. To find out the
UGS per capita, the total green spaces extracted for the respective ward
are divided by the total population in each ward. While classifying the
rectified imageries, the high-density vegetation and low-density vegetation
were identified and calculated for each of the CCC wards using
the spectral reflectance of the imageries and field visit. The high-density
vegetation was defined as plantation and naturally grown forests with
crowns crisscrossing, and low-density vegetation was defined as the
trees whose crowns are not crisscrossing and low crown shrubs.
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index Analysis Method
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index is the vegetation index representing
the green concentration and presence of chlorophyll which
is critical and closely related to oxygen production in a specific area
(Pettorelli, 2013). It was calculated in the ArcGIS 10.5 software using
the formula adopted by (Myneni et al., 1995; Running, 1990), shown in
equation (3)
Land Surface Temperature Analysis Method
Temperature monitoring from the earth data identifies the hotter and
cooler hotspots and the associated buffers. This index will feed into the
final understanding of the critical areas of the CCC wards. The ArcGIS tool
calculated the LST using the following equations (4–10) (USGS, 2019a).
For the Landsat 7 imagery, the LST calculation followed the following
formulae (USGS, 2019a):
Conversion of Digital Number to Radiance
Here, Lλ = spectral radiance at the sensor’s aperture in (Watts/(m² ×
sr × μm)), QCAL = quantized calibrated pixel value in digital number
(DN), LMINλ = spectral radiance scaled to QCALMIN in (Watts/(m² × sr
× μm)), LMAXλ = spectral radiance scaled to QCALMAX in (Watts/(m² ×
sr × μm)), QCALMIN = minimum quantized calibrated pixel value (corresponding
to LMINλ) in DN = 1 for LPGS products = 1 for NLAPS** products
processed after April 4, 2004 = 0 for NLAPS** products processed
before May 4, 2004, and QCALMAX = maximum quantized calibrated
pixel value (corresponding to LMAXλ) in DN = 255
Conversion of Radiance into Brightness Temperature (In Kelvin) Calculation of Top of Atmospheric Spectral Radiance Conversion of Radiance to At-Sensor Temperature Calculation of the NDVI Calculation of the proportion of the vegetation, Pv Calculation of the Land Surface Emissivity (LSE (ϵ))  Calculation of the LST
Correlation and Regression
The relationship between population versus NDVI and NDVI versus LST
was examined by regression coefficients and simple correlation analysis
(Chen et al., 2013). The linear regression analysis estimated the regression
coefficients for the dependent variable NDVI and the independent
variable population, and then for the dependent variable LST and the
independent variable NDVI separately (Anbazhagan & Paramasivam,
2016). The significance level of the statistics was also analyzed by calculating
p-values for the years 2000 and 2020 (Sanjeewani & Manawadu,
2016). Equation (11) demonstrates the form of the regression structure
and clearly describes the connection between the dependent and
independent variables.  y = a + bx Here, y is the dependent variable being predicted, x is the independent
variable, b is the slope of the line, and a is the y-intercept.